dr k why are we so different to our own
mind shouldn't our mind be nice to us
no our mind should not be nice to us
this is a good question
someone's asking shouldn't our mind be
nice to us no what so chat let's do a
little bit of socratic teaching okay you
guys are gonna get like
professor kenosha today instead of dr k
what is our mind designed for absolutely
good job chat has learned a lot it is
for
survival it is not it has evolved to
survive
not to make you feel happy right so if
we think about some of these things like
ego negative emotion even stuff like
shame like
think about this for a second there's a
there's a there's
a video on dr k's guides about why we
have negative emotions
it's like one of my favorite videos
because like like just think about this
chat
why the hell do we have the experience
of shame
and sadness and fear like they're just
negative they make us feel like crap
so this is conserved across the human
race
every single human out there is capable
of feeling
anger sadness fear and shame why
right like just just like understand
this this is important
so the reason we have negative emotions
is because
they're helpful from an evolutionary
study we wouldn't have them right it's
not even like 50 50. it's not like
you know brown hair or blonde hair it's
like
there's a variance in the population
because bl blonde hair is not
necessarily better than brown hair
but there is no variance in the
population about the
experience of negative emotions so
negative emotions absolutely serve a
function
and at the end of the day you can say
survival but if you kind of think about
you know like on a day-to-day basis like
you know what is the purpose of fear
like fear is to protect you what is the
purpose
of anger anger is to like help you stake
out your territory and like
not be you know taken advantage of by
other people like those are necessary
emotions
and and so like anxiety like what is the
purpose of anxiety like anxiety
forewarns us of danger if we didn't have
anxiety
we wouldn't like anxiety is just our
predictive capacity
and our ability to plan for like
negative scenarios in the future
right it's like anxiety is the reason
that we're able to like store food for
the winter
like those link like those circuits are
linked
should we prioritize survival or
happiness survival first happiness
second
so remember maslow's hierarchy of needs
so this is what we sort of discover and
this is part of the reason so if we want
to talk about why is mental illness
getting worse it's because i think we've
as a society met a lot of our basic
needs
so self-actualization and finding
purpose and meaning
is like more of an issue now like i
still remember
talking to my grandmother about when she
was growing up like
india had rationing right it was like
under british colonial rule
and basically like it doesn't matter how
much money you had like there wasn't
enough flour or sugar to be bought there
was no such thing as a grocery store
there was like a dispensary where you go
once a week
and you get a certain amount of thing
and if you run out of flour you're out
of flour until next week you're not
gonna get any more
there's nowhere to buy it just doesn't
exist
and self-actualization is like not that
important
in that situation survival is important
and what we sort of discovered
as the human race gets better we start
to become like more
mentally unsatisfied which is not a bad
thing it's just part of the process so
even if you look at buddha like there's
a reason why
if you look at all of the p not all but
the majority of
people who started religions
in the east they're all kings
so like it's kind of interesting because
if you look at the indian subcontinent
right so like
india gave us buddha he gave us rama it
gave us krishna it gave us all these
like deities from this like karmic set
of religions
and in india there used to be a caste
cis or there still is a catholicism sort
of
and the top cast were the brahmanas who
are the the closest to god
the teachers of meditation in the most
spiritual
and all of the enlightened figures from
india are not brahmanas
they're chatrias the the noble cast the
warrior cast
they were kings so then it begs the
question why don't brahmins get
enlightened and why do the chatris why
do the students get enlightened but the
teachers don't
there's a really simple answer for it
it's because
the brahmanas lived in poverty
and the chatris lived in luxury so
there's
always a seed of like desire in the mind
of a brahmana
who takes a vow of poverty right they're
not allowed to earn
what they do is they live off of the
donations of other people
and so the chaterias are the ones that
get enlightened because like if you kind
of think about it if your mind is
unhappy what does your mind tell you
tells you
if you had this you would be happy if i
had a girlfriend i'd be happy if i had a
boyfriend i'd be happy if i had more
money i
i'd be happy if i had a you know the
right video card
i'd be happy if i had a ps5 i'd be happy
if all these things happened i would be
happy
and so what happened with the nobles is
like they got all those things
and they like climbed the hedonistic
treadmill for a while and they sort of
like reach the top and they're like wait
i'm still not happy now what
wudo was loved respected revered
powerful and wealthy
and then he woke up one day and he was
like i'm unhappy
and so all that's left is spirituality
right so this is when people are saying
all kinds of stuff like if i had a
gtx or rtx 3090 or whatever
and other people like if anime was real
i'd be happy no you wouldn't you'd be
happy for a time and then you'd become
just as unhappy as the people in the
enemies
are you are you saying that spirituality
is required for us humans
to be happy that's been my experience
right so like
i think so i mean y'all are welcome to
disagree i have read the power of now
do i recommend it sort of so i think
that like
you know reading a book is never a bad
thing but i i don't think that
i think it's good like you should read
books on spirituality and meditation and
like
power of now is eckhart tolle right so i
think he's got a lot to offer
i personally find
a lot of those books to be like a touch
simplistic and a touch repetitive
i tend to be a little bit more
systematic and like want more detail and
understanding
and i think a lot of that has been lost
with like the explosion of mindfulness
so like mindfulness is like
this is also in dr k's guides we'll sort
of contextualize where mindfulness
belongs in the tradition of meditation
mindfulness sort of offers five percent
of what i think like the meditative
traditions offer
someone's asking i've heard of spiritual
reasons to live in poverty too though
so i don't i don't know if this is like
uh okay so we're gonna do a little bit
of lore
all right so this story maybe is top of
mind because i just shared it this
morning
in in said group but so when i tried to
become a monk at the age of 21
my teachers were like they didn't tell
me this at that time but they
you know they said go back finish your
studies get a doctoral degree and we'll
take you if you
if you still want to do it when you're
30. and i didn't understand this but
like you guys understand that like
becoming a monk is about renunciation
right so you like give up your life
at the age of 21 i had less than a 2.0
gpa was on academic
probation had a net worth of zero
dollars and had never been in a
relationship
had never like accomplished anything i
had nothing to give up
my life was like completely empty
there's nothing to renounce
it was escapism right it's like this
life is like there's nothing
i'm not giving anything up i'm running
away from a pile of crap that is my life
and so they were smart because they
realized like you're not gonna make it
unless you give something up like
becoming a monk is about
giving up stuff it's about renunciating
right like it's like renouncing stuff
so in order to renounce something you
have to have something
so like we'll take you like once you
succeed in the material world
so my teacher told me he's like be as
successful as you can in the material
world
and when you reach the height of success
in the material world then give it up
and then we'll take you so like win the
trophy
and then quit the tournament before you
get your prize
you know that's that's the road of
renunciation
so when when we kind of say that like
people people like so someone was asking
about isn't there
poverty through spirituality like yes
there is but i think it's
grossly misunderstood and tends to be
like really really abused
so i want y'all to understand this when
someone like a monk like a real monk
like someone who understands this stuff
the reason that they don't
wear a fancy watch is not because
avoiding a fancy watch makes you
spiritually strong
it's the other way around it's the
spiritual strength that allows them to
recognize that like
whether you wear a watch or you don't
wear a watch it doesn't mean anything
right it's detachment from the thing so
we see this a lot like especially like
in the indian and hindu community like a
lot of people will
fast because they think i mean fasting
can be healthy and can be a spiritual
practice
but i think a lot of times they'll like
look at the way that monks eat and
they're like wow like you see how that
monk doesn't indulge in anything
if i don't indulge in things i will
become spiritual too
monkey see monkey do i will get
spirituality too
but they've got it backwards it's the
renunciation and detachment of the monk
that allows them to eat
whatever without a problem and so like i
can eat like rice
and dal every day because
it's all the same to me it's the
detachment that allows me to live a
simple life
it's not forcibly living a simple life
that will create the spirituality
so you'll see a lot of people who will
be these like
false spirituality egotistic people
and i've seen them all the time right
they're like these people who like
i'm not going to live a material life
like i'm going to be above
that crap i'm going to deprive myself of
all of the materialism
because i'm going to be a spiritual
person so much ego
it's all ego completely misses the point
i'm gonna be better than that that's ego
you're not doing anything
you're just confusing yourself
right like it's it's like bro you're
like completely missing the point
the desire to not want material things
should come
naturally as a consequence of your
spiritual practice that's been my
experience
like sometimes people will be confused
by how i dress and it's not i'm not like
dressing to advertise my spirituality
i just genuinely don't care like why do
i care about you know sometimes i'll
dress nice because i recognize that i'm
a human
i have to play by the rules of the
humans so you know
back i don't know if you guys remember
this but back when i like worked in an
office i would stream
in a suit and it's like
why do you like you know i don't need to
stream in a suit anymore i don't
so i don't thought crosses my mind it's
like maybe every now and then i should
wear a suit i was thinking about
streaming in a suit actually recently
more just because i was like i should
use this article of clothing that
i spent some money on but understand
that spirituality is like it's a little
bit
backwards right so and there is value to
fasting for the sake of gaining
spirituality
there's definitely value to that but
it's not quite what i see mo
the way most people do it which is like
this is what spiritual people do
so i'm gonna do that thing to become
more spiritual
whereas those behaviors are the
consequence of an internal change that's
what they don't understand
and so then they walk the walk and then
they think that like
that's sufficient but spirituality isn't
about outward behaviors it's about
internal stuff it's like you know you
can be in the world
or not in the world and you can be a
monk either way
is the waking up app an okay way to get
into meditation sure i think it's an
okay way to get into meditation but
here's the problem with the apps
the apps don't have in-depth
instructions so like
so if you look at most meditation apps
what they actually will do is give you a
variety of techniques to keep the
curiosity of the mind engaged
right they say like okay like today
we're going to do this kind of
visualization today we're going to do
that visualization
because like the monkey mind that we
have like needs novelty to continue to
do something
whereas like if you want to do real
meditation like i've been doing the same
damn meditation practice for 17 years
and that's when it really starts to work
i encourage you to just think about
anything else that you like build a
skill in
right it's like today i'm gonna write
and today i'm gonna paint or tomorrow
i'm gonna paint and the next day i'm
gonna play music like
there's value to that sure like you're
sort of artistically doing a bunch of
stuff
but i mean i i think that there's a lot
of power to
doing the same meditation practice which
is the right meditation practice for you
over a long period of time and generally
speaking when you look at
you know people who are very
accomplished meditators
they didn't get that way through an app
they like
like i've never heard of anyone becoming
enlightened through an app
it generally tends to be like a
dedicated focused spiritual practice
like taught by a real teacher
but i think apps are a great
introduction i think they're a great way
to like anchor
some degree of ben like like you know
practice
but i just don't think they're that in
depth
so it's a good introduction